% mainfile: ../Mag_Iono_2014.tex
% \textbf{}
% Ch12: Substorms
% lec 14

The substorm is one of the major types of events that happens in the
magnetosphere. We know that it has to do with some type of storage of
energy, then the subsequent release of that energy. We will discuss the
three typical phases of a substorm; note that these phases are not
necessarily distinct for all events. 

First the phase names: growth, expansion, recovery. 

The growth phase is the energy accumulation phase. The time scale of the
growth phase can vary widely, depending on what we think to be the
loading conditions, which we suspect is associated with the solar wind.

The expansion phase is almost always observable. Arguably, the expansion
phase is the best understood of all the phases, while at the same time
one can poke a lot of holes in our understanding of this phase, which we
will cover in this chapter.

The recovery phase sometimes doesn't seem to exist -- or, at the least,
it isn't observed on the instruments dedicated to observing this kind of
thing. Sometimes though your typical substorm only has the first two
phases, and sometimes this might not be because the observing instrument
simply couldn't detect it --- you've got the solar wind constantly
driving this process, and it doesn't conveniently stop doing this so
that we can be assured to record a recovery phase! 

If you ever go picking through the literature on substorms over the past
several decades, you will surely see references to auroral substorms and
magnetospheric substorms, sometimes as if they are two distinct
phenomena. At one point, yes, a lot of people thought these two phrases
corresponded to two distinct phenomena. Particularly in the 70s and even
in the 80s, you had researchers going to great pains trying to
distinguish between these two types of substorms...ultimately, to no
avail since we now understand that
they're essentially the same thing --- two parts of one whole. It simply
depends on how the substorm is being observed. In
hindsight this is pretty easy to see. 

The classic picture we use to talk about the auroral substorm comes from
Akasofu [REFERENCE!!!]. This picture focuses on what images of the
aurora look like during the different phases of a substorm. This is how
substorms were initially thought about --- via their auroral signatures.
Nowadays there seems to be a more large-scale magnetospheric view of
substorms. The rift between ground-based observations and space-based
observations of substorms has slowly closed and, now, with missions like
THEMIS [Time History of Events and Macroscale Interaction during
Substorms], substorms are largely studied from from multiple sets of
spacecraft data. 

Akasofu's substorm sequence of images are akin to what
you would see in data from an all-sky imager, looking up; each image is a "zenith
view." You can picture yourself sitting right on the magnetic pole,
looking straight up; you see the auroral oval. As time goes on, you see
the beginning of the growth phase (in the picture, it says this phase is
on the order of 0-5 minutes, however these days we would more likely
quote this phase at 30-60 minutes). At some point, some new behavior is
seen: a westward travelling surge of auroral brightness; you are now
viewing the expansion phase. This auroral signature is quite apparent in
the all-sky data; it is the signature of the expansion phase. The surge
eventually begins to break up, marking the start of the recovery phase. 

The growth phase is actually fairly
difficult to see in ground-based observations, so in the 60s when this
was the primary way of observing substorms, things wereren't always so
clear. With the advance of technology, the use of spacecraft, and so on,
we now have a much better understanding of each phase, and some
understanding concerning the physical mechanisms responsible for each
phase. We can reconcile what is seen in spacecraft data with what the
ground-based observer sees. Essentially though, we still have no
definitive theory of the substorm: there are still competing models,
utilizing different physical mechanisms, that seemingly fit tidy with
observations...or perhaps with our lack of observations. Missions like
THEMIS attempt to get simultaneous observations along the magnetotail
and, in conjunction with ground-based all-sky and magnetometer data,
distinguish between the competing models. So far though, the jury is
still out [circa 2014].

The magnetospheric substorm is one of the biggest, unresolved problems
in magnetospheric physics. One might lump magnetic reconnection into
this category as well, but magnetic reconnection is an unresolved in
plasma physics in general. By the end of this chapter, we will make the
argument that the magnetospheric substorm, too, is not simply a
magnetospheric issue, but one of plasma physics in general. You see
"magnetospheric substorm" processes, for example, on the Sun. 

In the 90s and early 2000s, there used to be all sorts of debates and
contentions concerning the different aspects of substorms. In fact, it
was so contentions, and sometimes bitter, personal arguments, that there
was good reason for younger researchers at the time to just stay out of
it and focus their abilities on other, less obviously controversial
issues. Maybe even today one could argue that the substorm problem is
not really a good place for a young researcher --- a graduate student,
say --- to pick up and start. It is a contentious topic with folks who
have spent their whole careers arguing for one paradigm over andother,
and it gets heated and personal. Arguments are great, discussions are
great, yea, but if you can't go out for a beer afterwards, something is
wrong with you or your colleagues. 

That said, a young researcher has to know about substorms, and
understand what is understood about them. While working on other topics,
who knows, the formerly young, now-aging (and more importantly, now
tenured or secured in a research job) researcher might suddenly have
stumbled upon observations or ideas that are relevant and ripe for the
substorm problem. And, finger's crossed, by that time all the old
curmudgeons are retired.

We'll cover what we know right now [2014]. If you're reading this book
in 10 years (and if we haven't updated it), don't come to us yelling
that we have everything ass-backwards. We might. But this is what we
know now. We are presenting the popular consensus, but we certainly do
not hope to indoctrinate anyone. Who knows, the popular consensus might
be right, but then again --- it might be wrong. This is still research
in progress. Take it all with a grain of salt!

With that said, let's cover in more details what is currently known
about the different phases of the substorm.

The substorm starts off with a growth phase. Typically whenever we study
a substorm, or the activity associated with a substorm, retrospectively,
we almost always find the growth phase associated with a southward
turning of the interplanetary magnetic field [IMF] -- the magnetic field
in the solar wind. But, wait a minute? Doesn't this sound a lot like the
condition we listed for the onset of a magnetic storm? Essentially,
whenever you have a CME or CIR, or what have you, you typically see a
southward turning of the IMF, and we suspect this induces the dayside
reconnection, which allows the solar wind plasma to enter into the
magnetosphere. Yes, this is very similar to the magnetospheric storm,
but with substorms you do not have to have any type of shock event
associated with the growth phase. That is, for a substorm, any southward
turning the IMF will do; there doesn't have to be an associated increase
in field strength, or density, and the southward turning needn't be
prolonged. For a storm, the southward turning is typically on much
larger time scales. [SEE FIGURE -- isolated substorm vs magnetic storm]
[WHAT CAUSES THE "FLICKER-LIKE" SOUTHWARD TURNINGS OF THE IMF THAT ARE
RESPONSIBLE FOR SUBSTORMS? --ANDY COULDN'T CLEARLY ANSWER. As far as
substorms are concerned, this is just an initial condition.]

What we think happens is, when there is a southward turning of the IMF,
dayside reconnection is able to occur. This reconnection process on the
dayside allows magnetic flux and any associated plasma to be removed
from the dayside and dragged into the lobes of the magnetosphere. Thus
this growth phase is often considered to be a loading phase. The
southward directed IMF, essentially frozen into the quickly passing
solar wind, becomes merged with the dayside magnetopause, which then is
dragged tailward into the lobes. The lobes become storage space for
magnetic energy --- that is, the magnetic flux in the lobe region
accumulates during this period, growing stronger in intensity. 

Typical duration for the growth phase is accepted to be between 30-60
minutes these days. It used to be considered much shorted based on the
idea of the auroral substorm, when we only had ground-based
instrumentation and could only observe the auroral component of the
growth phase. 

In addition to the southward turning of the IMF, one also sees changes
in ionospheric convection associated with the substorm growth phase. Not
only does the magnitude of the ionospheric convection increase, but it
also changes its structure spatially. [NEW FIGURE -- ionospheric
convection]. On the left of the figure, we have the typical picture of
ionospheric convection during normal, non-substorm periods. We talked
about this in [CHAPTER ???]. Basically, during normal conditions, you
have the Pedersen currents (current parallel to the electric field)
going from the dawnside to the duskside, and you have the thermospheric
winds, and the thermospheric dynamo [SEE CHAPTER ??? FOR FULL
DESCRIPTION / DESCRIBE A LITTLE BETTER HERE]. During a substorm,
oftentimes you will see the Pedersen currents increase dramatically, and
you will see a distortion of the flow lines associated with that. So
your Hall currents, your Pedersen currents -- they're all changed. Thus,
your field aligned currents are all different, and this is very easily
observed from the ground, particularly with incoherent scatter radars
[ISRs] and Super DARN systems [Dual Auroral Radar Network]. 

Other observations associated with substorms include: 

* an increase in the
size of the polar cap and an equatorial expansion of the trapping
boundary. Essentially, because you have more dayside reconnection going
on, you have more flux entering into the polar cap region, and so the
polar cap swells, progressing equatorward. So, the open-closed boundary
unto itself swells equatorward. 

* a slow increase of the magnitude of the magnetic field in the
magnetotail lobe region. 

* Intensification of the field-aligned current, both into and out of the
ionosphere. This is implied by the increase in the Pedersen currents
mentioned above. If you are driving a stronger Pedersen electric field,
there is going to be an increased component of the current, both from
Hall and Pedersen aspects, and if you have one part of a circuit that is
trying to increase its current, then you will ultimately flood the rest
of your current system (your circuit) with current as well. Circuits
101: you cannot have a pile-up of current anywhere. So you have these
enhanced FACs to the tail and to the ring current.

* The stretching of the near-Earth magnetic field at about 6-15 $R_{E}$
from a dipolar to a more tail-like geometry. That is, instead of having
a geomagnetic geometry with a nice dipole-like structure, the structure
of the magnetic field begins deforming, as if the field lines are being
pulled anti-sunward, away from the Earth. This is often referred to as
"pinching" or "stretching" of the magnetic field. It is argued that this
is the primary way that magnetic energy is being stored, by the this
deformation of the geomagnetic field structure to a higher energy state
than its typical ground state. To put a system into a higher energy
state, work has to be done on that system --- and this goes for any
system, whether you're studying thermodynamic systems, quantum
mechanical systems, or the geomagnetosphere. For the geomagnetosphere,
the work done to put the system into a higher energy state comes is by
the solar wind. And so, similar to picking a rock off the ground and
giving it potential energy, which becomes kinetic once you decide to
drop the rock, the geomagnetosphere, due to newly enhanced and
manifested current systems, is "lifted" into a higher potential energy
state, which will ultimately "snap" back to its ground state when the
conditions causing this can no longer support it.

* Formation and expansion of a thin near-Earth current sheet, which
begins rapidly thinning toward the end of the substorm growth phase. The
dramatic amount of thinning is a good marker for the end of the growth
phase and the beginning of the expansion phase. 

When you look at the complete model of what we think a substorm is
doing, that complete model actually requires all seven different observations 
to be observed. But oftentimes it just so happens that one of these
seven substorm-associated events is not observed. There are times during
a substorm growth phase where only a couple of these events are
observed. So this list of events shouldn't be thought of as a logical
"and" statement: you do not need condition 1 AND condition 2 AND
condition 3, and so on, to have observed a substorm growth phase.
Rather, it is more like a logical "OR" statement: 1 OR 2 OR 3 OR 4, and
so on and so forth. 

A lot of researchers are trying to reconcile the current picture of a
substorm with questions concerning why you may or may not see some of
these events associated with the substorm growth phase. For example, if
you do not see an increase in ionospheric convection --- an increase in
the FACs --- well, is it still a substorm? What is the entire process of
the substorm growth phase that allows for the FACs to increase, or not?
There are papers out there that cite all seven of these conditons, but
not necessarily all at the same time, so any model really ought to be
able to account for not only all of these events occurring at once, but
for times when not all of these events occur at once, or some of them
not at all. 

Tail dynamics during the growth phase -- the "stretching" of the
near-Earth field lines -- 

With the cross-polar cap potential and the approximate dayside
reconnection rate, one can estimate the convection in the
plasma sheet that is required if a steady-state transport of magnetic
flux is to occur. If we take a typical cross-tail voltage and a typical 
electric field that is observed in the cross-tail region, we can then use 
a map of the magnetic field, e.g., a Tsyganenko model, to compute what the 
$\vec{E}\times\vec{B}$ drifts are. For example, $0.5 [mV/m]$ is a very 
typical for a cross-tail electric field. Given we're in the equatorial
plane (the electric field is in this plane, while the magnetic field is
perpendicular to it, giving us a drift in towards the Earth), and using an appropriate magnetic field model, the computed
$\vec{E}\times\vec{B}$ drifts take on velocities exceeding 500 [km/s].
Simply put, this is not observed. Something is wrong here, and it's easy
to identify: during a substorm process, we are not in a steady state. So
the starting assumptions here were invalid. 

The absence of such high-velocity plasma flows have to do with
constraints on magnetospheric convection. 

----- NOT DONE YET!

 
