% mainfile: ../Mag_Iono_2014.tex
% \textbf{}
% Ch14: Lower and Middle Atmosphere
% Lec16-17








% 2nd half / Lec17  ------------------ 
 
The coldest place on Earth is in the polar summer mesosphere; and it is
warmer in the polar winter mesosphere, where the Sun never shines! This
is not what one would expect. In fact, we see in the low atmosphere in
the polar winter, we have cold temperatures, but right above, at the
stratopause, we have a very warm region. Why? One would expect that it
would be cold from bottom to top. 

To first approximation, the wind field in the lower and middle
atmosphere can be determined from geostrophy and thermal wind balance.
And superimposed on that background flow are all the waves: the
atmospheric tidals waves, the planetary waves, and the gravity waves. 

What do the climatological winds look like? [Fig\_2-2]. We've got our
eastern flowing winds in the winter hemisphere, and our westward winds
in the summer hemisphere. In the figure, these winds are called
"westerlies" and "easterlies" -- remember, the "-ly" terminology means
"from the," as in an easterly is from the east and a westernly is from
the west. Some people find this terminology confusing, so we also use
"westward winds" and "eastward winds." 

In the upper troposphere we see peaks in the contour curves: these are
the jet streams. If you're interested, look into Hadley cells and the
Hadley cell circulation. If you have more time, look into eddy cells and
polar cells too! We don't have too much time, so we will be skipping
over these topics. 

We will talk about the easterly (westward) peak in the Summer mesospher / lower
thermosphere, as well as the peak in the high-latitude winter
hemisphere, from about 30-70 [km]. It is this wind cell that is the
polar vortex, a dominant player in the dynamics of the thermosphere and
mesosphere. It is one of the largest atmospheric structures that we ever
really see throughout the lower, middle, and upper atmosphere system.
The mid-latitude peak at about 60 [km] altitude is called the polar
night jet; do not confuse it with the polar vortex. 

At the very end, we will ask ourselves: what creates a cold summer
mesosphere when the Sun is up 24 hours a day? What creates a warm winter
stratosphere and mesosphere when the Sun is down 24/7? Why is the
equatorial lower stratosphere so cool? 

The planetary waves and the gravity waves alter the circulation of the
lower and middle atmosphere, and indirectly this changes the circulation
of the thermosphere. [Fig\_2-3; pic w/ arrows]. The purple arrow
represent the flow of gravity waves, the blue arrows the flow of
planetary waves, and the yellow arrows the induced circulation. 



We're going to try to understand some of this circulation from the point
of view of the gravity waves. Generally, in the winter hemisphere,
mountain waves, topography, convective cells, frontal structures, jet
stream instabilities --- all of these things emit gravity waves.
Remember, gravity waves are the atmospheric buoyancy waves. 

Down at low altitudes, the amplitudes of the generated gravity waves are
quite small, but as the gravity waves propagate away from teh source and
upwards, because the density of the atmosphere is dropping off
exponentially, the wind speed picks up in order to conserve energy. So,
these waves, as they propagate up through the stratosphere and into the
mesoaphere become exceedingly large amplitude to the point that,
typically, the wave packets will counter one of two breaking mechanisms:
a convective instability where you have convection occurring (i.e., the
conditions for convective turnover are met --- warmer air under cooler
air), or you get what is known as a dynamical instability, which as
applied to the lower and middle atmosphere is synonymous with the
Kelvin-Helmholtz instability [KHI] --- the wave phases are in opposite
directions at such magnitudes that there is a shear in the flow and this
causes the waves to break. 

We are not sure which comes first: does the wave become convectively
unstable then dynamically unstable? Or vice versa? There is a lot of
observations that indicate one mechanism over the other and, so,
fundamentally it's both: both the convective instability and the KH
instability cause the upward propagating gravity waves to break. It just
depnds on the background conditions as to which one happens first. At
the least, this is the best summary of what we know as of 2014.

More on the convective instability:
The convective instability is, essentially, when you have cooler air
over warmer air; it's a gradient in which the adiabatic lapse rate
doesn't allow a parcel to fully expand and cool down as it's displaced
in altitude. So what happens is that you get constant motion of warmer
air upwards, and this basically pulls energy away from the wave form. We
call this a convective instability. So, the gravity wave is propagating
--- and when you you look at the wave fronts, if you stop time and look
at the wave structures, you will see that there regions --- phase
sturctures --- that appear at low altitudes that are of warmer
temperatures than the phase structures above it. This induces a
convective circulation. Likewise, you get this with a shear instability.
If you freeze time, and look at the spatial structure of the wave, you
would see that you have winds going in the opposite directions in the
different phases. This is ripe for KHI, a vortex instability some would
call it. 

In the lower atmosphere, we lump instabilities into convective and
dynamical. In the upper atmosphere, with plasmas, these terms can mean
different things. But down low, where there is just neutral gas, a shear
instability is KHI at its finest. 

As the upward propagating gravity waves meet a condition for
instability: as they become convectively unstable or they meet the
conditions for dynamic instabiliity, the wave will start to break. The
wave will start to overturn and essentially what you get is energy and
momentum deposition --- transfer from the wave to the mean flow. The
high-altitude, high-latitude region within the dotted purple curve in
the winter hemisphere indicates a rough geographic area that we expect a
lot of gravity waves generated in the lower atmosphere, to be breaking
and depositing energy into the mesospheric system. This was one of the
key aspects of connecting what the importance of gravity waves is to
atmospheric circulation. These waves are depositing energy as they're
breaking --- they're providing a drag force to the mean flow, that is,
the otherwise geostrophic flow. That induces a net circulation. If we
look at just the meridional circulation, that is, just the north-south
circulation, what it does is it pulls air from lower latitudes and
pushes it towards the higher latitudes. So, looking at the figure, you
see the yellow arrows in the winter hemisphere are representing how the air is being pulled from
the lower latitudes to the higher latitudes, and eventually downwards,
all because of this gravity-wave breaking. If you could prevent the
gravity waves from being generated, and so ultimately stop them from
propagating upwards and breaking, this circulation would not be
induced. This was a famous result in 1985: the induced circulation in
the mesosphere can have consequences in the troposphere and in the
thermosphere. 

In the summer hemisphere, you get a similar structure. You have some
gravity waves propagating up. What happens with the waves generated by
topography is that they get filtered out into the mean flow at low
atltitudes --- this is
due to their dispersion relation (which we'll get to), which prevents
them from propagating through a wind reversal. But the gravity waves
generated by convection are able to propagate past the wind reversal and
into the middle atmosphere. On the figure, you'll see that these gravity
waves break a bit higher in altitude than they do in the winter
hemisphere. The eddy forcing is much more constrained in altitude here
since the gravity waves that are able to propagate this far are all of
teh same nature and, thus, all break in a fairly confined region. So,
although in the winter hemisphere you have this very large area of wave
breaking, it is distributed --- in the summer hemisphere, all the wave
break is in one place, not distributed over a large area. This breaking
induces a circulation that pushes air towards the winter hemisphere.  

So you these regions constantly pulling air over from the summer to the
winter. Starting in the high latitude summer, we have air being pulled
upward, it's adiabatically cooling -- that is, it's entering a region of
lower pressure, a parcel of air is expanding and cooling, and this is
what creates the cold summer conditions. 

Likewise, on the opposite side of the globe in the summer hemisphere,
the air is being compressed and forced downward, adiabaticalling -- that
is, you get heating. So the heating in the stratosphere in the winter
hemisphere has nothing to do with ozone whatsoever. The heating is
purely due to dynamics: purely due to a downward flow of air being
adiabatically compressed, causing local heating. 

When you get into the thermosphere and ionosphere, the consequences of
these dynamics --- of this circulation just described --- follow into
these regions. And so you get this interplay of dynamics induced from
the dynamics of the lower and middle atmosphere competing with the
plasma dynamics and competing with the solar radiation. It gets really
ugly. Down below, we do not have to consider plasma dynamics. 

Due to the upward flow in the summer hemisphere, and the adiabatic
cooling of the air, you get these mesospheric clouds --- sometimes
called noctilucent clouds, or polar mesospheric clouds. The name "polar
meospheric cloud" should be avoided since these clouds have been
observed over Utah, which is certainly not the polar region. 

The clouds in the cold region of the lower stratosphere in the winter
hemisphere, where there is no sunlight, are called polar stratospheric
clouds [PSC]. PSCs play a pivotal role in the ozone depletion issue in
the winter and spring time periods at high latitudes. 

The equatorial lower stratospheric region in the figure with the
lightning cloud is called intertropical convergence zone. Lots of
convective activity here. The higher-altitude part of the cloud is
called an "anvil." Lots of upward motion of air mass, some of it goes
north, some south, and some just goes up into the mesophere and lower
thermosphere. 

So what about the planetary waves in the figure?
Planetary waves, for a long time, were thought to be the wave that was
heating the warm stratospheric region in the winter hemisphere. The
theory was that these waves were transporting the heat flux, and
although this isn't wrong, it is nowhere near the amount of heat induced
by the adiabatic heating of the downward flowing air from the
higher-altitude region. Planetary waves interact with the polar vortex
system, and we will be talking about this more in a moment. In the
summer hemisphere, the planetary waves barely get out of the
stratosphere, again due to the dispersion relationship --- they tend to
break down wherever they encounter a wind reversal. So most of their
energy is deposited in the tropopause and lower stratospheric system.At
the low altitudes, these are dominating the dynamics -- the gravity
waves are just too small at low altitudes.

Bigger than any of the waves is the polar vertex. In the figure, you can
see the core of this vort centered on the winter pole. The wind is
increasing as you go outwards from the core. The polar vortex extends
from about 10-15 [km] in the troposphere up to altitudes of 100+ [km],
well into the thermosphere. This isn't theory --- you've got empirical
data going all the way back to the 1980's showing this. It is known that
the polar vortex goes way into the thermosphere. This thing is a big
driver of the winter hemisphere. In fact, if anyone does measurements of
planetary waves or tidal waves above, say, 50 degrees latitude --- if
they do not take into account the polar vortex, then the study is wrong.
Throw it in the garbage. It's like trying to study the winter in NJ and
gauging how people react to the winter, but never mentioning or taking
into account snow on the ground and snowstorms. If a study above 50
degrees latitude in the winter hemisphere doesn't
mention the polar vortex, it is ignoring one of the defining
characteristics of this region. 

Oddly, some people think the polar vortex is just a stratospheric
phenomenon --- there are even text books that say this. That's just
utterly wrong. It goes way into the thermosphere, and we've known this
for decades. 

<New figure --- one with polar vortex / sudden strat warmings >

Polar Vortex and Sudden Stratospheric Warmings [SSWs]
When most researchers think of the polar vortex, they think of sudden
stratospheric warmings. Certainly, there has been interest as of late
(circa 2014) because of its incursions over the United States and the
consequential cold temperatures we've had in the mid-West and the North
East. 

In this figure, we have a period from 1995 (yes, a long time ago); this
is from an earlier paper of one of the authors [REFERENCE]. We're
looking at maps looking down at the northern hemisphere; you see maps at
certain pressures. For example, in the top left, you see a map at 10
hecto-Pascals [hPa]. Remember, 10 hPa is 10 millibars, which -- if you
remember from a previous lecture -- corresponds to about 30-kilometers
altitude --- about the height that balloons pop. (Yes, some of us are
crazy enough to refer to altitude in terms of pressure. It's to scare
off the faint of heart.) To the right of the 10 hPa map, you see another
map at 1 hPa: about 45 km. (Altitude goes up, pressure goes down.)

You can ignore the dots in these figures for now (read the paper if you
absolutely do not want to ignore the dots). What we want to show is that
over the period of about four days, you see that the polar vortex cell
just slowly slides off to the side --- from its eye over northern
Greenland to Iceland. Subtle meandering typical of the polar vortex. If
the lower and middle atmosphere for were in thermal balance, the polar
vortex would stay still and just exist right over the pole. But the
lower and middle atmosphere are not in thermal balance: they are
constantly being impacted by various waves, and in particular by
planetary waves from lower latitudes near the equator, which travel
poleward and tend to nudge and move the polar vortex around. This
nudging comes from the gamut of longitudes, at any and all altitudes in
the lower and middle atmosphere. So everyday the polar vortex, a cyclone
system, changes a bit. This is typical, quiet, calm behavior of the
polar vortex. This is why it can shift over the United States --- if
there is a lot of planetary activity over in the Eurasian sector, this
would essentially push the polar vortex down towards the United States,
and lo and behold you would have a period of colder conditions. Again,
because this is a vortex system, most of the air is locked into the
vortex system, so you can think of the whole cyclonic blob of potential
vorticities (in the figure) as transporting the air and dynamics within
it all over the hemisphere, anywhere it is nudged to. So, say in the
nortnern hemisphere, this activity is going on starting some time in
November and going until about April. 

This past winter [2013-14], the polar vortex was quite active --- enough
so that its news coverage has made it a household term. The polar vortex
this past winter became displaced from the pole quite a bit. Why would
the polar vortex be more dispaced towards the United States this year
than in other years? This is not a trivial question and you can begin to
come up with all sorts of possibe causes. Before you know it, you can be
going down a rabbit hole: is this climate change? is this enhanced
planetary wave activity? is this increased tropical rainfall over in the
Eurasian sector? And so on and so forth! 

In the next figure showing the polar vortex and SSWs, we show a period
in 1998 -- January 15, 21, 30, and February 6. Again we have the two different pressure levels, 10 hPa and 1
hPa, which correspond to about 30 km and 45 km, respectively. Here you
see the polar vortex system being moved around quite a bit. Notice in
the 980130 10-hPa map that there is a planetary cell juxtaposed next to
the polar vortex. That is, notice there is a 2-cell structure in that
map --- this is a vortex-vortex interaction. These two vortex systems
are constantly feeding off each other, rubbing against each other,
interacting. When this interaction gets very intense there are times
where, say, the planetary wave cell can push the polar vortex cell right
off the pole and substantially weaken it. Although the planetary is
small relative to the polar vortex, it's like Joe Fraser vs Mahammed
Ali, or David vs Goliath. The big guy is big, but not unstoppable: the
small guy just has to hang in there long enough to wear the big guy
down. The planetary waves in this case aren't really transporting all
that much momentum and energy, but they are disrupting the polar vortex
circulation. This figure is a great example of the planetary waves
pushing the polar vortex off the pole. 

So what is a sudden stratospheric warming? When the planetary waves
starts getting highly active and energized by some forcing mechanism,
specifically at mid-latitudes or tropical latitudes, you can have a SSW.
This is when the planetary cell that you are studying becomes of
comparable magnitude to the polar vortex [NEXT FIGURE]. When this
happens, and other certain conditions are met, we say it's a sudden
stratospheric warming. 

A word of warning: the "stratospheric" component of the name "sudden
stratospheric warming" is a bit misleading. SSWs are associated with the
thermosphere and mesosphere as well as the stratosphere. It's a horrible
name, unfortunately. These events were first observed using weather
balloons. It's historical. Even in their definitions, emphasis is on the
stratosphere. In this day and age, we know the name should include the
mesophere too, if not the thermosphere/ionosphere. 

There are various ways you can define a SSW. Often these events are
classified in the zonal mean contex [e.g., Andrews, 1987], which is the
World Meteorological Organization's definition of SSWs. (The zonal mean
context means that you are averaging all longitudes over the same
latitude.) You have an
assortment of warmings: major warmings, minor warmings, Canadian
warmings [SEE ASSOCIATED TABLE]. Take warning: this definition is used
operationally, but it's only half right. Any time you see something
about the polar vortex or SSWs defined in the zonal mean context, it's
not the whole story. In reality, SSWs come about via the interaction of
two vortex systems --- the dynamics between two cells, which is much
more interesting and complex than looking at the zonal mean. Sure, you
will come around to about the same answer, but for very different
reasons. The zonal mean approach is a bit of a cop out. There is still
debate in the community of how to actually depict the physics of SSWs:
should we use the zonal mean picture, or use the full-on vorton-vorton
interaction picture? 

Fundamentally, if you go ahead and push the whole vortex system off to
the side, it shuts down the downward transport of air mass at the winter
pole [SEE ANDY'S CARTOON FIGURE FROM BEFORE]. By pushing the vortex
system off the pole, you are basically shutting down that cell of
circulation you have in the winter hemisphere in some localized region.
This is the interesting stuff: when a warming happens, how does the
entire global circulation change? We do know that when there is a SSW in
the winter hemisphere, the circulation at the other side of the globe,
at the summer pole, will change. In the past five years or so, it has
been shown that the circulation in the upper mesosphere as well as in
the thermosphere also shuts down. What you have then is a relaxation of
the characteristics in the thermosphere back to what you would expect
doing equinoctal time periods [MAYBE EXPLAIN THIS MORE]. The point is,
the localized warmings in the winter polar region have consequences that
are quite global in scale, impacting the thermosphere, ionospheric
scintillation, GPS measurements, satellite drag, and on and on.

These last few paragraphs should make it clear to you that any global
climate change models that do not go above 20-km altitude are total
bunk. If you don't have the full atmospheric circulation in your model,
you are not modeling the real atmosphere. If you only look at altitudes
up to, say, 15 km --- giving 5 km for a sponge layer --- and double the
$CO_{2}$ you're simply going to get the wrong answers for the wrong
reasons. You haven't taken into account the entire global circulation,
you haven't taken into account the chemistry of the upper atmosphere.
Basically, a lot of the work from the early 90s were utterly wrong. 

Mesospheric Inversion Layers [MIL]
A MIL is essentially the occurence of an inversion that you observe in
the mesosphere. The name describes the phenomenon quite well. [NEW
FIGURE]. In the figure, you see temperature profiles measured from about
20-km altitude up to about 100-km altitude. Over sequential time steps
you see a temperature enhancement in the mesosphere. So, to be clear, an
inversion layer is a reversal of the temperature gradient, typically
associated with warmer temperatures than normally you would otherwise
have. Inversion layers occur all the time in the troposphere. This is
why some urban areas have lots of smog --- the urban areas are natural
inversion areas. For example, Lima, Peru, exists in its own natural
inversion layer. 

In the mesosphere, we typically see two major temperature inversion
layers -- the lower inversion layer (around 70 km) and the upper
inversion layer (around 90 km). The higher-altitude inversion layer is
about 7 km wide, and has a temperature increase from the background state of
about 25 K. Just below the inversion, you typically have a region of
cooling, although it is tough to quantify. For the lower-altitude MIL,
you again have about a 25 K increase in temperature. The width, however,
is basically unknown --- very hard to quantify. 

We care about MILs because we do not know what causes them. We're also
interested in MILs because we know they can act as a source for gravity
waves. On the bottom side of the MIL, the temperature is increasing with
altitude and so it's convectively stable. However, on the top side of
the MIL, you have a region where the temperature decreases faster than
the adiabatic lapse rate. This means that this region is very conducive
for convective instabilities, and thus these instabilities that result
can exert a drag on the background wind flow, and contribute to the
circulation. Furthermore, these instabilities can be a source of gravity
waves, which then radiate away from the MIL, grow in amplitude, and have
an impact on other locations. 

[NEW FIGURE]

It is generally accepted that different physical mechanisms generate the
two different MILs. We think the upper MIL is the result of gravity wave
or tidal wave interaction -- wave-wave interactions. The lower MIL does
not seem to have the same temporal characteristics. We think the lower
MIL is the result of planetary waves breaking and depositing energy in
the background flow. There is a lot of evidence that suggests that these
ideas are right... However, it is all still a hot bed of research. For
example, the gravity wave and tidal wave interactions at the upper MIL;
we're trying to understand mode-mode mixing and different mode coursing
[???] of the background conditions. 

[NEW FIGURE --- rive pic of bores]

Mesospheric Bores
If you have any jokes about bores being bores --- it's all been said
before. We've had entire Chapman Conferences on bores; certainly any
joke that could have been made there, was made.

If you're familiar with bores at all, it is probably with undular bores
typically found in long, narrow water ways. This figure shows the
typical characteristics of an undular bore in a narrow river.
Downstream (bottom right), there is a relatively smoothly surfaced body of water.
Upstream (top left), due to some kind of forcing, water is driven
downstream quicker than the nominal flow; at the front, you see a shock,
often described as a hydraulic jump. The shock is a transition region
between a very smooth, laminar flow to a mixed, chaotic flow. This is
similar to the bow shock in the magnetosphere [LECTURE ?]. If we made
this figure into a movie, you would see the bore progress downstream;
behind it, you would see the trailing waves, which are actually wavelets
shedding energy from the shocked bore system. 

In the oceans and rivers we have a pretty good handle on bores, however this 
is not the case in the mesosphere. [NEW FIGURE] When using an all-sky
camera or a photometer and you look at airglow signatures, for example
from the 557.7 nm line (oxygen) coming from about 95 km altitude, you
see these bore structures proceed through your entire field of view. On
the right image in the figure, on October 15 (of some year!), you see a very
bright region at the top left of the field of view; in front of it you
see a relatively dark region (not the black hole in the image, which is
an artifact from the instrument). This bright region progressed
southeast from the
top left to the bottom right of the field of view over the course of
about 25 minutes. In the same image, you might also note a less intense
bright region at the bottom right, which we think is a gravity wave.
Bascially, out of the field of view to the northwest, there was some
source that generated this gravity wave followed by the mesospheric
bore. The image on the left of the figure is a time-difference image,
which enables you to see some of the high frequency content more
clearly. 

Lots of work going on concerning what creates bores and the role of
bores. We care about bores because they carry a lot of the same
signatures and characteristics of gravity waves, only they can transport
energy much further than gravity waves typically do...in theory. No one
has really ever staggered all-sky cameras and observed just how far
these things travel. We think they're able to travel quite far. 

One of things we do not
have a handle on, which we will get to later, is how variable gravity
waves are --- what is the intermittency of gravity waves? We do not
understand the full role gravity waves play in the lower and middle
atmospheric circulation. 

Various theories have been proposed concerning mesopheric bores. One
theory is that you have some type of mesospheric inversion layer that
acts as a duct --- a channel --- that supports bore formation and allows
waves to be ducted along the MIL. Consequently, you'd expect to see the
same thing near the lower MIL. Unfortunately, we cannot easily directly
observe the activity near the lower MIL. At the upper MIL we can use the
557.7 oxygen line, but for the lower MIL we do not have it so easy ---
typically we can maybe see the top of the lower MIL using the OH
emissions in the near infrared. 

Fundamentally, we do not understand how much energy bores contribute and
how much energy these bores redistribute around the globe. We do not how
efficient bores are at transporting energy. 

Stratospheric Temperature Enhancements [STEs]: again what we have here
are enhancements in temperature profiles that no one really understands
yet. [NEW FIGURE] We tend to see them at high latitudes, although recent
work has shown that they also appear at mid-latitudes. They are
typically temperature enhancements in the stratosphere and do not seem
to be related to mesospheric inversion layer, although they are
associated with similar dynamics and much of the same intrigue. STEs
seem to be the result of two planetary wave cells interacting with
eachother; the two cells interact and, ultimately, lead to a highly
baroclinic atmosphere --- that is, the pressure and density surfaces do
not line up. This is a ripe region for instabilities and for extraction
of energy from the background wind flow. Of course, there are certain
climatological features of STEs we focus on, but we do not really have a
good handle on the physical mechanism that causes them. It's definitely
a work in progress!

One would be remiss to talk about the lower and middle atmosphere
without talking about the ozone. In particular, we want to discuss a bit
about the chemistry and dynamics of the ozone. Most of us are aware of
the issues surrounding the ozone, namely, the ozone hole. Some of us may
even be aware of various popularized formation mechanisms concerning the ozone hole.
One could do a whole series of lectures on the ozone hole and even just
conerning recent developments in our understanding of it. 

We'll focus on this: the ozone hole is a consequence of more than just
CFCs. There are a lot of players here: the polar vortex, the formation
of polar stratospheric clouds, and lots of hetergeneous chemistry that
takes place on the surfaces of those polar stratospheric clouds, which
convert the CFCs into an ozone-destroying component. 

[NEW FIGURE - Andy's slide of PSCs and ozone loss]

When the ozone hole issue is occurring, most of the interesting stuff is
occurring in the winter hemisphere at night. So it's in the winter
stratosphere where the temperatures get very cool, and at these
temperatures the saturation vapor pressure drops, which causes the
formation of polar stratospheric clouds [PSCs]. PSCs can also be
generated by mountain-induced gravity waves. There's been a lot of work
investigating how much topography contributes to PSC formation in
contrast to regular old nucleation; still a very active realm of
research.

The intersting thing about PSCs is that they form a site where
heterogeneous chemistry can proceed. The way that this can happen is
that these chlorofluorocarbons [CFCs], as well as a number of other
chemicals (we'll pick on the CFCs because everyone seems to pick on the
CFCs), are transported to high altitdudes via Hadley cell and eddy cell
convection. The PSCs serve as a laboratory where the CFCs can undergo
chemical processing. The CFCs are converted into a sun-sensitive
reservoir species such that, in the spring when the sun comes up,
photochemistry breaks down these reservoir species into chlorine,
flourine, and bromine (among other compounds), which are now free to
break down ozone in the region. Normally this isn't a problem: nature
usually has a back-up in the form of $NO_{x}$ compounds -- that is $NO_{3}$,
$NO_{4}$, $NO_{5}$. These $NO_{x}$ compounds would normally interact
with the chlorine, flourine, and bromine, and lock them back up so they
wouldn't be able to deplete the ozone. However, PSCs do one other
devious thing: in addition to processing CFCs into compounds which can
then be broken down into various species that can then break down the
ozone, PSCs also remove $NO_{x}$ from the atmosphere. So the real
culprit in the lower and middle atmosphere for ozone removal is not
exactly CFCs. Please understand this: CFCs do not directly destroy
ozone; CFCs contain compounds such that, when CFCs are processed in the
right way via chemistry and sunlight, can be released to destroy ozone.
But CFCs unto themselves do not destroy ozone. The real mastermind
behind ozone depletion are these polar stratospheric clouds: they allow
the criminals (Cl, F, and B) to be released from jail (the CFCs) and
also remove all the cops (the $NO_{x}$ that would have otherwise
re-captured the CL, F, adn B). In the arena of public perception, the
CFCs get the bad rap...

The topics of current research relevant to this are: what mechanism
forms PSCs? are the conditions for PSC formation improving due to global
climate change? how does aurorally-generated $NO_{x}$ contribute to the
processing of CFCs? Randall et al [GET REFERENCE] looks at $NO_{x}$ from
auroral sources in the lower thermosphere-mesospher and the eventual
transport of those $NO_{x}$ components down into the stratosphere ---
that is, he asks the question, "Does the aurora actually help to destroy
the ozone?" We'll talking about this more when we talk about ionospheric
work in progress [CHAPTER/LECTURE ?]. 

Another cloud formation hot topic in the middle and upper atmosphere is
that of mesospheric clouds --- sometimes referred to as noctilucent
clouds. It is suspected that mesospheric clouds may be a harbinger of
global change, to wit, it has been suggested that these clouds are now
being seen more frequently. But it is still unclear if this is due to
observational bias: are more people just looking for them now than there
have been in the past? If you look back at [ANDY'S FAMOUS PIC], what's
believed to be happening is that when you increase green house gas
concentration, this is associated with increased gravity wave activity,
which is associated with increased momentum deposition in the middle
atmosphere, which causes ehanced circulation from the summer to the
winter hemisphere. So it's believed that the high-altitude region of the
summer mesosphere (top right of figure) is getting cooler, allowing
mesospheric clouds to be forming progressively to lower and lower
latitudes. And this is why these mesospheric clouds are thought to be a
harbinger of global change --- the clouds unto themselves may not be
very interesting, but as a tracer of dynamics they're extremely
interesting. They are an easily tracked impact of a changing climate.
The other way to track global climate change is to do polar vortex
work..... [ELABORATE OR DELETE]

We've skipped a lot of phenomena: the northern annual mode (NAM), the
southern annual mode (SAM), the quasi-biennial oscillation (QBO), the
semi-annual oscillation (SAO), meteor ablation, meteor deposition,
sporadic layers associated with plasma injections from the ionosphere.
We just sampled a few topics.

Research in Progress for the lower and middle atmosphere: we are still
trying to understand the variability of the base state parameters (the
winds and the temperatures). Observations between 30-100 km is very
difficult... Still trying to understand spatial and temporal variability
of the structures in this region. Why do mesospheric clouds form earlier
in some years than others? Why is the polar vortex more stable in some
years and less stable in others? 

Wave propagation, wave breaking, wave-wave interactions,
parameterization in GCMs, sources of waves, impact on upper atmosphere.

What is the role of gravity waves on the general circulation and on
synoptic scales?


